4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 1/25
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
Land
People
Economy
Government and society
Cultural life
History
Nepal
Himalayas
The Himalayas, northern Nepal.
Nepal
Nepal
Nepal, country of Asia, lying along the southern slopes
of the Himalayan mountain ranges. It is a landlocked
country located between India to the east, south, and
west and the Tibet Autonomous Region of China to the
north. Its territory extends roughly 500 miles (800
kilometres) from east to west and 90 to 150 miles from
north to south. The capital is Kathmandu.
Nepal, long under the rule of hereditary prime ministers
favouring a policy of isolation, remained closed to the
outside world until a palace revolt in 1950 restored the
crown’s authority in 1951; the country gained admission
to the United Nations in 1955. In 1991 the kingdom established a multiparty parliamentary
system. In 2008, however, after a decadelong period of violence and turbulent negotiation
with a strong Maoist insurgency, the monarchy was dissolved, and Nepal was declared a
democratic republic.
Wedged between two giants, India and China, Nepal seeks to keep a balance between the
two countries in its foreign policy—and thus to remain independent. A factor that
contributes immensely to the geopolitical importance of the country is the fact that a
strong Nepal can deny China access to the rich Gangetic Plain; Nepal thus marks the
southern boundary of the Chinese sphere north of the Himalayas in Asia.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 2/25
As a result of its years of geographic and self-imposed isolation, Nepal is one of the least developed nations of the world. In
recent years many countries, including India, China, the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, Denmark, Germany,
Canada, and Switzerland, have provided economic assistance to Nepal. The extent of foreign aid to Nepal has been influenced
to a considerable degree by the strategic position of the country between India and China.
Land
Relief
Nepal contains some of the most rugged and difficult mountain terrain in the world. Roughly 75 percent of the country is
covered by mountains. From the south to the north, Nepal can be divided into four main physical belts, each of which extends
east to west across the country. These are, first, the Tarai, a low, flat, fertile land adjacent to the border of India; second, the
forested Churia foothills and the Inner Tarai zone, rising from the Tarai plain to the rugged Mahābhārat Range; third, the mid￾mountain region between the Mahābhārat Range and the Great Himalayas; and, fourth, the Great Himalaya Range, rising to
more than 29,000 feet (some 8,850 metres).
The Tarai forms the northern extension of the Gangetic Plain and varies in width from less than 16 to more than 20 miles,
narrowing considerably in several places. A 10-mile-wide belt of rich agricultural land stretches along the southern part of the
Tarai; the northern section, adjoining the foothills, is a marshy region in which wild animals abound and malaria is endemic.
The Churia Range, which is sparsely populated, rises in almost perpendicular escarpments to an altitude of more than 4,000
feet. Between the Churia Range to the south and the Mahābhārat Range to the north, there are broad basins from 2,000 to 3,000
feet high, about 10 miles wide, and 20 to 40 miles long; these basins are often referred to as the Inner Tarai. In many places they
have been cleared of the forests and savanna grass to provide timber and areas for cultivation.
A complex system of mountain ranges, some 50 miles in width and varying in elevation from 8,000 to 14,000 feet, lie between
the Mahābhārat Range and the Great Himalayas. The ridges of the Mahābhārat Range present a steep escarpment toward the
south and a relatively gentle slope toward the north. To the north of the Mahābhārat Range, which encloses the valley of
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 3/25
Kathmandu, are the more lofty ranges of the Inner Himalaya (Lesser Himalaya), rising to perpetually snow-covered peaks. The
Kathmandu and the Pokharā valleys lying within this mid-mountain region are flat basins, formerly covered with lakes, that
were formed by the deposition of fluvial and fluvioglacial material brought down by rivers and glaciers from the enclosing
ranges during the four glacial and intervening warm phases of the Pleistocene Epoch (from about 2,600,000 to 11,700 years
ago).
The Great Himalaya Range, ranging in elevation from 14,000 to more than 29,000 feet, contains many of the world’s highest
peaks—Everest, Kānchenjunga I, Lhotse I, Makālu I, Cho Oyu, Dhaulāgiri I, Manāslu I, and Annapūrna I—all of them above
26,400 feet. Except for scattered settlements in high mountain valleys, this entire area is uninhabited.
Drainage
The Kathmandu Valley, the political and cultural hub of the nation, is drained by the Bāghmati River, flowing southward, which
washes the steps of the sacred temple of Paśupatinātha (Pashupatinath) and rushes out of the valley through the deeply cut
Chhobar gorge. Some sandy layers of the lacustrine beds act as aquifers (water-bearing strata of permeable rock, sand, or
gravel), and springs occur in the Kathmandu Valley where the sands outcrop. The springwater often gushes out of dragon￾shaped mouths of stone made by the Nepalese; it is then collected in tanks for drinking and washing and also for raising paddy
nurseries in May, before the monsoon. Drained by the Seti River, the Pokharā Valley, 96 miles west of Kathmandu, is also a flat
lacustrine basin. There are a few remnant lakes in the Pokharā basin, the largest being Phewa Lake, which is about two miles
long and nearly a mile wide. North of the basin lies the Annapūrna massif of the Great Himalaya Range.
The major rivers of Nepal—the Kosi, Nārāyani (Gandak), and Karnāli, running southward across the strike of the Himalayan
ranges—form transverse valleys with deep gorges, which are generally several thousand feet in depth from the crest of the
bordering ranges. The watershed of these rivers lies not along the line of highest peaks in the Himalayas but to the north of it,
usually in Tibet.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 4/25
The rivers have considerable potential for development of hydroelectric power. Two irrigation-hydroelectric projects have been
undertaken jointly with India on the Kosi and Nārāyani rivers. Discussions have been held to develop the enormous potential of
the Karnāli River. A 60,000-kilowatt hydroelectric project at Kulekhani, funded by the World Bank, Kuwait, and Japan, began
operation in 1982.
In the upper courses of all Nepalese rivers, which run through mountain regions, there are little or no flood problems. In low￾lying areas of the Tarai plain, however, serious floods occur.
The rivers and small streams of the Tarai, especially those in which the dry season discharge is small, are polluted by large
quantities of domestic waste thrown into them. Towns and villages have expanded without proper provision for sewage disposal
facilities, and more industries have been established at selected centres in the Tarai. The polluted surface water in the
Kathmandu and Pokharā valleys, as well as in the Tarai, are unacceptable for drinking.
Climate
Nepal’s climate, influenced by elevation as well as by its location in a subtropical latitude, ranges from subtropical monsoon
conditions in the Tarai, through a warm temperate climate between 4,000 and 7,000 feet in the mid-mountain region, to cool
temperate conditions in the higher parts of mountains between 7,000 and 11,000 feet, to an Alpine climate at altitudes between
14,000 and 16,000 feet along the lower slopes of the Himalaya mountains. At altitudes above 16,000 feet the temperature is
always below freezing and the surface covered by snow and ice. Rainfall is ample in the eastern portion of the Tarai (which
receives from 70 to 75 inches [1,800 to 1,900 millimetres] a year at Bīratnagar) and in the mountains, but the western portion of
Nepal (where from 30 to 35 inches a year fall at Mahendranagar) is drier.
In Kathmandu Valley, average temperatures range from 50° F (10° C) in January to 78° F (26° C) in July, and the lowest and
highest temperatures recorded have been 27° and 99° F (-3° and 37° C). The average annual rainfall is about 55 inches, most of
which falls in the period from June to September. At Pokharā the temperature ranges from 40° F (4° C) in January to
approximately 100° F (38° C) in June, just before the monsoon. In winter, temperatures during the day rise to 70° F (21° C),
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 5/25
creating pleasant conditions, with cool nights and warm days. Because warm rain-bearing monsoon winds discharge most of
their moisture as they encounter the Annapūrna range, rainfall is quite heavy (about 100 inches) in the Pokharā Valley.
Plant life
The natural vegetation of Nepal follows the pattern of climate and altitude. A tropical, moist zone of deciduous vegetation
occurs in the Tarai and the Churia Range. These forests consist mainly of khair (Acacia catechu), a spring tree with yellow
flowers and flat pods; sissoo (Dalbergia sissoo), an East Indian tree yielding dark brown durable timber; and sal (Shorea
robusta), an East Indian timber tree with foliage providing food for lac insects (which deposit lac, a resinous substance used for
the manufacture of shellac and varnishes, on the tree’s twigs). On the Mahābhārat Range, at elevations between 5,000 and
10,000 feet, vegetation consists of a mixture of many species, chiefly pines, oaks, rhododendrons, poplars, walnuts, and larch.
Between 10,000 and 12,000 feet, fir mixed with birch, as well as rhododendron, abound. In the mid-mountain region of Nepal a
fairly dense population has cleared all but the most inaccessible parts of the forest, which are restricted to areas of steep slopes
and rocky terrain. Similarly, all readily accessible parts of valuable sal forest in the Tarai have been devastated by overcutting
and depletive practices. The vast forested area below the timber line in the Great Himalaya Range bears some of the most
valuable forests in Nepal, containing spruce, fir, cypress, juniper, and birch. Alpine vegetation occupies higher parts of the Great
Himalaya Range. Just below the snow line, between 14,000 and 15,000 feet, grassy vegetation affords favourable grazing
ground in summer.
Pradyumna P. Karan
Animal life
The forested areas of the Tarai are the home of tigers (including the majestic but endangered Bengal tiger) and leopards, gaurs
(wild ox), occasional elephants and buffalo, and many deer; the deer include chital, or axis, deer (which have white-spotted
bodies), sambar (a large Asiatic deer with coarse hair on the throat and strong antlers), and swamp deer. The Lesser Rāpti
Valley, in south-central Nepal, is one of the last homes of the great Indian rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis). Much poaching
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 6/25
Bengal tiger
Bengal tiger (Panthera tigris tigris).
has gone on, as the horn of the rhinoceros is reputed to be valuable as an aphrodisiac, but
in the 1960s the Nepal government organized protective measures.
There are few wild animals in the central zone because of the clearing of forests.
Occasional leopards, bears, and smaller carnivores inhabit the forests and ravines, and
muntjacs (a kind of small deer, also called the barking deer) are found in the woods. In the
Alpine zone are musk deer, widely hunted for the musk pods they carry, the tahr (a
Himalayan beardless wild goat), the goral (any of several goat antelopes, closely related to
the Rocky Mountain goat), and wild sheep, which are preyed upon by wolves and snow leopards. Pheasant are common. The
Yeti (bear-man, or Abominable Snowman) is said by the Sherpa to inhabit the high snow mountains but has eluded discovery by
several expeditions. Strange tracks are often found in the snow, but it is believed that they are probably made by bears. River
wildlife includes the mahseer, a large freshwater food and sport fish.
Richard Riseley Proud Matinuzzaman Zuberi
People
Ethnic groups
The large-scale migrations of Asian groups from Tibet and Indo-Aryan people from northern India, which accompanied the
early settlement of Nepal, have produced a diverse linguistic, ethnic, and religious pattern. Those with Indo-Aryan ancestry,
especially the Pahāṛī (including the Chhetree, the Brahman-Hill, and others), have enjoyed great prestige in Nepal for centuries,
and the ruling families have been of Indo-Aryan and Hindu background. Most of the Tibeto-Nepalese groups—the Tamang,
Rai, Limbu, Bhutia (including the Sherpa), and Sunwar—live in the north and east, while the Magar and Gurung inhabit west￾central Nepal. The majority of the famous Gurkha contingents in the British army have come from the Magar, Gurung, and Rai
groups. A third set of ethnic groups, which includes the Newar and the Tharus, are believed to have settled Nepal before the
Tibetan and Indo-Aryan migrations. The Newar, who have largely adopted Indo-Aryan and Hindu customs, retain significant
influence in Nepal, especially in the Kathmandu valley.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 7/25
Languages
The principal and official language of Nepal is Nepali (Gorkhali), spoken in the Tarai and the mid-mountain region. Nepali
belongs to the Indo-Aryan branch of the Indo-European family. There are a number of regional dialects found in the Tarai and
mountain areas. The languages of the north and east belong predominantly to the Tibeto-Burman family. These include Magar,
Gurung, Rai, Limbu, Sunwar, Tamang, Newari, and a number of Bhutia dialects, including Sherpa and Thakali. Although
Newari is commonly placed in the Tibeto-Burman family, it was influenced by both Tibeto-Burman and Indo-European
languages.
Religion
In Nepal a vast majority of the population is Hindu, but a small percentage follows Buddhism or other religious faiths. Hindus
and Buddhists tend to be concentrated in areas where Indian and Tibetan cultural influences, respectively, have been dominant.
Settlement patterns
Almost all Nepalese live in villages or in small market centres. Outside of Kathmandu, there are no major cities. Smaller urban
centres (Birātnagar, Nepalganj, and Birganj) are located in the Tarai along the Indian border, and Pokharā is situated in a valley
in the mid-mountain region. In addition, a few townships—such as Hitaura, Būtwal, and Dharān—have begun to emerge in the
foothills and hill areas, where economic activity has developed.
Demographic trends
Nepal is a young country, with more than three-fifths of the population under 30 years of age. The birth rate is about the same as
the world average, while the death rate is lower than the world average. Life expectancy is 70 years for men and 72 years for
women.
Economy
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 8/25
rice cultivation
Woman working in a rice field in
Chitwan district, Nepal, 2015.
Landlocked, lacking substantial resources for economic development, and hampered by an inadequate transportation network,
Nepal is one of the least developed nations in the world. The economy is heavily dependent on imports of basic materials and
on foreign markets for its forest and agricultural products. Nepal imports essential commodities, such as fuel, construction
materials, fertilizers, metals, and most consumer goods, and exports such products as rice, jute, timber, and textiles.
The political and administrative system of Nepal has not made those changes in trade, investment, and related economic
policies that would expedite economic development and attract foreign capital. The government’s development programs,
which are funded by foreign aid, also have failed to respond directly to the needs of rural people.
Agriculture
Agriculture—primarily the cultivation of rice, corn (maize), and wheat—engages most of
Nepal’s population and accounts for well over half of the country’s export earnings. Yet
agricultural productivity is very low. The low yields result from shortages of fertilizers and
improved seed and from the use of inefficient techniques. Because only a tiny percentage
of Nepal’s cultivated land area is under irrigation, output depends upon the vagaries of the
weather. Potatoes, sugarcane, and millet are other major crops. Cattle, buffalo, goats, and
sheep are the principal livestock raised.
On the whole, Nepal has a small surplus in food grains. There are, however, major
dislocations in supply and demand. Periods of shortage between harvests of various crops occur in the mountain areas. At the
same time, substantial amounts of food grain are moved to India from the Tarai. Because of the lack of adequate transportation,
surplus food grain from the Tarai does not move north into the food deficit areas of the mid-mountain region. Some food grains
move northward from the Tarai and the mountain areas into Tibet, however, despite a shortage in the mountain regions.
The greatest potential for increases in agricultural production is in the Tarai. In the mid-mountain region the potential for
increasing production is limited. Because of the high population concentration in this region, almost all land capable of
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 9/25
cultivation is tilled. Increasing the cultivated land area by cutting into standing forests aggravates erosion and results in reduced
yields and land losses by landslides. Major projects have been undertaken in an effort to halt soil erosion and deforestation.
Forestry
About one-third of Nepal’s total area is forested; most of this area is state-owned. In spite of overcutting and poor management,
timber represents one of the country’s most valuable resources and is a major source of potential revenue. Exports of forest
products constitute an important source of Indian rupees. Almost all timber is exported to India. The sawmills of the Timber
Corporation of Nepal, a government-owned lumber-processing concern, supply Kathmandu Valley with construction and
furniture wood.
Resources and power
Nepal’s mineral resources are small, scattered, and barely developed. There are known deposits of coal (lignite), iron ore,
magnesite, copper, cobalt, pyrite (used for making sulfuric acid), limestone, and mica. Nepal’s great river systems provide
immense potential for hydroelectric development. If developed and utilized within the country and exported to India (the
principal market for power generated in Nepal), it could become a mainstay of the country’s economy.
Manufacturing
Industrial production represents a small but growing segment of economic activity. Most industries are small, localized
operations based on the processing of agricultural products. The jute industry, centred in Birātnagar, is an important earner of
foreign exchange. Sugar factories are located in Birātnagar, Birganj, and Bhairahawā. There are a sawmill and a meat￾processing plant in Hitaura and a number of rice and oil mills in the Tarai. Other industries include brick and tile manufacture;
processing of construction materials, paper, and food grain; cigarette manufacture; cement production; and brewing of beer. In
general, there are more industrial enterprises in the private than in the public sector, although most of these are cottage
industries. The main areas of manufacturing concentration are Birātnagar, the Birganj–Hitaura corridor, and the Kathmandu
Valley.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 10/25
Tourism
Tourism represents a small but expanding industry. Foreign tourism is primarily confined to the Kathmandu Valley, which is the
only area equipped with the necessary hotels, food supplies, roads, and international transport services. There are, however,
many areas outside the Kathmandu Valley with potential for the development of tourism; these include Pokharā, the Mount
Everest area, and the Nārāyani area (where big game exists).
Trade
For geographic and historical reasons, most of Nepal’s trade is with India. China and the United States are also trade partners of
some significance. Attempts have been made to diversify trade through agreements with such countries as China, Japan, South
Korea, Pakistan, the United States, Germany, and Poland. The state trading agency, National Trading Limited, has expanded its
activities by fostering the development of commercial entrepreneurial activity. Large-scale commercial activity has hitherto
been in the hands of foreigners, primarily Indians.
Nepal’s foreign trade and balance of payments have suffered setbacks, and exports have not increased enough to pay for imports
of consumer goods and basic supplies. Nepal’s dependence on the Indian market for most of its imports and exports and on the
port of Kolkata for its access to the sea has been the source of periodic friction between the two countries.
Transportation
Transport facilities in Nepal are very limited; few independent nations in the world of comparable size have such little road
mileage and so few motor vehicles. Construction of new roads has been undertaken since the 1970s with aid from India, China,
Great Britain, and the United States. The main means of transportation has been the network of footpaths, which interlace the
mountain terrain and valleys. Trails have evolved into main trade routes, which tend to follow the river systems.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 11/25
The meagre road-transport facilities in Nepal are supplemented by only a few railway and air-transport links. Increased use of
road transport has reduced the significance of the two narrow-gauge railroads that run from Amlekhganj to Raxaul (India) and
from Janakpūr to Jaynagar (India). The Nepal Airline Corporation, an autonomous government agency, is the country’s flag
carrier. Tribhuvan International Airport in Kathmandu is the primary hub for flights in and out of the country; Gautam Buddha
International Airport was opened in Siddharthanagar (Bhairahawa) in 2022. The United States built the Kathmandu–Hitaura
aerial ropeway in the 1950s, and it is still used for carrying goods into the capital.
Leo E. Rose
Government and society
Constitutional framework
Although reforms in the 1950s began to move the kingdom toward a democratic political system, the crown dissolved
parliament in 1960 and subsequently banned political parties. Thereafter, Nepal became only nominally a constitutional
monarchy, and the constitution of 1962 (amended 1967, 1976, and 1980) effectively gave the king autocratic control over a
multitiered system of panchayats (local bodies, or councils). In the 1980s, political restrictions were eased, and organizations
such as the Nepali Congress Party, the Communist Party of Nepal, numerous small left-leaning student groups, and several
radical Nepalese antimonarchist groups were allowed to operate more or less openly. Political parties, however, were not again
legalized until 1990, when nationwide unrest forced King Birendra to accept the formation of a multiparty parliamentary
system.
A new constitution promulgated on November 9, 1990, greatly reduced the power of the monarchy. The king remained the head
of state, but effective executive power was given to the Council of Ministers, headed by the prime minister. Appointed by the
king, the prime minister was required to be either the leader of the majority party in the House of Representatives (the lower
house of parliament) or, if there was no majority party, a representative who could form a coalition majority.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 12/25
The king was constitutionally also a part of parliament and was charged with giving assent to bills that had been passed by both
legislative chambers—the House of Representatives and the National Council (the upper house). The House of Representatives
consisted of 205 members popularly elected to five-year terms. The 60 members of the National Council held six-year terms; 10
were nominated by the king, 35 were elected by the House of Representatives (of which 3 had to be women), and 15 were
selected by an electoral college. The constitution gave the House of Representatives considerably more power than the National
Council.
All Nepalese citizens age 18 and older are eligible to vote. Because most voters in Nepal are illiterate, candidates largely have
been chosen by party symbol (e.g., a tree for the Nepali Congress Party and a sun for the United Marxist-Leninist Party of
Nepal). Some voters, moreover, have had to travel long distances, in some cases for hours along mountain paths, in order to
reach a polling station.
Prior to 1990 the country was divided for administrative purposes into 5 development regions, 14 zones, and 75 districts; in
addition there were corresponding regional, zonal, and district courts, as well as a Supreme Court. The 1990 constitution
mandated the elimination of the regional and zonal courts, which were to be replaced by appellate courts. The administrative
divisions themselves continued to exist as provisional units.
The early 21st century was a tumultuous yet transformative period in Nepal’s governmental history. A Maoist insurgency that
had been gaining strength since the late 1990s demanded not only the election of a constituent assembly to draft a new
constitution but also the abolition of the monarchy. As the insurgents negotiated with the government, tensions escalated into
violence. Following intermittent peace talks, abortive cease-fires, dissolution and reconstitution of the House of
Representatives, and major abrogation of the king’s authority, the Maoists and the government finally agreed to the drafting of
an interim constitution—promulgated in January 2007—and the formation of an interim administration. Elections for a
constituent assembly of some 600 members were held in April 2008, and the following month the monarchy was indeed
dissolved and Nepal declared a republic.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 13/25
The country continued to operate for several more years under an interim constitution that provided for a unicameral legislature
and a Council of Ministers, with most of the power vested in the prime minister. Protracted negotiations finally produced a new
permanent constitution in 2015, which was approved by the legislature and promulgated on September 20. The document
established a secular federal-style republic consisting of seven administrative regions and a bicameral legislature. A president
would be head of state, and the Council of Ministers, led by the prime minister, would continue as head of government.
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica
Security
Nepal’s armed forces consist of the Royal Nepalese Army, predominantly an infantry force. The Army Flight Department
operates all aircraft. Except for a few simple weapons, all military supplies are imported. Nepal is famous for the fighting
qualities of its Gurkha soldiers; nearly 5,000 of them serve in British Gurkha units and 50,000 in Indian Gurkha units. The
British maintain a recruiting centre at Pokharā. Gurkha veterans are a valuable human resource of Nepal.
For police purposes, the country is divided into three zones: eastern, central, and western, with headquarters at Birātnagar,
Kathmandu, and Nepalganj, respectively. Each zonal headquarters, under a deputy inspector general of police, is responsible for
several subsections composed of four to five police districts operating under a superintendent of police. A district superintendent
is in charge of police stations in his area, and each station normally is supervised by a head constable.
Health and welfare
The Ministry of Health is responsible for the support and administration of public health services, including hospitals and health
clinics. Although the government has taken steps to improve existing health centres and to establish new ones, health care
remains inadequate. Malaria, tuberculosis, cholera, and typhoid are prevalent in spite of government projects to control or
eradicate them. Ayurvedic medicine, the traditional Hindu system of medicine, is popular in Nepal.
Education
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 14/25
The Ministry of Education and Culture is responsible for administration and supervision of all elementary and secondary
education. Higher education has developed relatively recently. The first college was established in 1918, and Tribhuvan
University in Kathmandu, with faculties of arts, sciences, commerce, and education, was chartered in 1959. The University
Senate has sole legal responsibility for higher education and the authority to grant academic recognition to colleges but is
largely dependent upon the Ministry of Education for funds.
Cultural life
The relaxation of censorship that followed the overthrow of Rana rule in 1951 encouraged a revival of artistic and intellectual
expression. In literature and poetry, Nepali works emphasize the cultural renaissance and national patriotism. King Mahendra, a
poet whose Nepali lyrics have been published in English translation under the name of M.B.B. Shah (for Mahendra Bir Bikram
Shah), did much to promote the revival of arts and literature.
The cultural heritage of Nepal, particularly contributions made by the Newar of Kathmandu Valley to sculpture, painting, and
architecture, is a source of great pride. Hindu and Buddhist religious values have provided the basic source of inspiration to
Newar artisans. The themes of most artistic works have been primarily religious; the lives of the gods, saints, and heroes and the
relationship of man to society and to the universe are expounded in sculpture, architecture, and drama. In Kathmandu Valley
some 2,500 temples and shrines display the skill and highly developed aesthetic sense of Newar artisans.
Music and dance are favourite pastimes among the Nepalese. Religious ceremonies require the use of drums and wind
instruments preserved from ancient times. Important in most religious and family occasions are devotional songs that have
elements of both classical and folk music and that have been used by some contemporary musical revivalists in their attempt to
bridge the gap between the two. The government-owned Radio Nepal broadcasts programs in Nepali and English. The country’s
first television station, at Kathmandu, began broadcasting in 1986.
Newspapers and periodicals are published in Nepali and in English. Newspapers are frequently sensational in tone and are
poorly staffed and financed. Gorkha Patra, published by the government, occupies a commanding position in the Nepalese
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 15/25
press. Nepalese newspaper readers rely on the foreign press, particularly Indian newspapers, which are flown daily into
Kathmandu, for more sophisticated coverage of world and national news.
After 1960 King Mahendra required newspapers to obtain official clearance for all reports of political activity. Subsequently the
government increased its censorship, and in 1985 the publication of many newspapers was suspended. In 1990, reflecting the
change in the country’s political climate, freedom of the press was restored.
Pradyumna P. Karan
History
Prehistory and early history
Nepal’s rich prehistory consists mainly of the legendary traditions of the Newar, the indigenous community of Nepal Valley
(now usually called Kathmandu Valley). There are usually both Buddhist and Brahmanic Hindu versions of these various
legends. Both versions are accepted indiscriminately in the festivals associated with legendary events, a tribute to the
remarkable synthesis that has been achieved in Nepal between the two related but divergent value systems.
References to Nepal Valley and Nepal’s lower hill areas are found in the ancient Indian classics, suggesting that the Central
Himalayan hills were closely related culturally and politically to the Gangetic Plain at least 2,500 years ago. Lumbini, Gautama
Buddha’s birthplace in southern Nepal, and Nepal Valley also figure prominently in Buddhist accounts. There is substantial
archaeological evidence of an early Buddhist influence in Nepal, including a famous column inscribed by Ashoka (emperor of
India, 3rd century BCE) at Lumbini and several shrines in the valley.
A coherent dynastic history for Nepal Valley becomes possible, though with large gaps, with the rise of the Licchavi dynasty in
the 4th or 5th century CE. Although the earlier Kirati dynasty had claimed the status of the Kshatriya caste of rulers and
warriors, the Licchavis were probably the first ruling family in that area of plains Indian origin. This set a precedent for what
became the normal pattern thereafter—Hindu kings claiming high-caste Indian origin ruling over a population much of which
was neither Indo-Aryan nor Hindu.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 16/25
The Licchavi dynastic chronicles, supplemented by numerous stone inscriptions, are particularly full from 500 to 700 CE; a
powerful, unified kingdom also emerged in Tibet during this period, and the Himalayan passes to the north of the valley were
opened. Extensive cultural, trade, and political relations developed across the Himalayas, transforming the valley from a
relatively remote backwater into the major intellectual and commercial centre between South Asia and Central Asia. Nepal’s
contacts with China began in the mid-7th century with the exchange of several missions. But intermittent warfare between Tibet
and China terminated this relationship, and, while there were briefly renewed contacts in subsequent centuries, these were
reestablished on a continuing basis only in the late 18th century.
Middle period
The middle period in Nepalese history is usually considered coterminous with the rule of the Malla dynasty (10th–18th century)
in Nepal Valley and surrounding areas. Although most of the Licchavi kings were devout Hindus, they did not impose
Brahmanic social codes or values on their non-Hindu subjects. The Mallas perceived their responsibilities differently, however,
and the great Malla ruler Jaya Sthiti (reigned c. 1382–95) introduced the first legal and social code strongly influenced by
contemporary Hindu principles.
Jaya Sthiti’s successor, Yaksha Malla (reigned c. 1429–c. 1482), divided his kingdom among his three sons, thus creating the
independent principalities of Kathmandu, Patan, and Bhaktapur (Bhadgaon) in the valley. Each of these states controlled
territory in the surrounding hill areas, with particular importance attached to the trade routes northward to Tibet and southward
to India that were vital to the valley’s economy. There were also numerous small principalities in the western and eastern hill
areas, whose independence was sustained through a delicate balance of power based upon traditional interrelationships and, in
some cases, common ancestral origins (or claims thereto) among the ruling families. By the 16th century virtually all these
principalities were ruled by dynasties claiming high-caste Indian origin whose members had fled to the hills in the wake of
Muslim invasions of northern India.
In the early 18th century one of the principalities—Gorkha (also spelled Gurkha), ruled by the Shah family—began to assert a
predominant role in the hills and even to pose a challenge to Nepal Valley. The Mallas, weakened by familial dissension and
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 17/25
widespread social and economic discontent, were no match for the great Gorkha ruler Prithvi Narayan Shah. He conquered the
valley in 1769 and moved his capital to Kathmandu shortly thereafter, providing the foundation for the modern state of Nepal.
Modern period
The Shah (or Sah) rulers faced tremendous and persistent problems in trying to centralize an area long characterized by extreme
diversity and ethnic and regional parochialism. They established a centralized political system by absorbing dominant regional
and local elites into the central administration at Kathmandu. This action neutralized potentially disintegrative political forces
and involved them in national politics, but it also severely limited the centre’s authority in outlying areas because local
administration was based upon a compromise division of responsibilities between the local elites and the central administration.
From 1775 to 1951, Nepalese politics was characterized by confrontations between the royal family and several noble families.
The position of the Shah dynasty was weakened by the fact that the two kings who ruled successively between 1777 and 1832
were minors when they ascended the throne. The regents and the nobility competed for political power, using the young rulers
as puppets; both factions wanted a monopoly of political offices and power for their families, with their rivals exterminated,
exiled to India, or placed in a subordinate status. This was achieved by the Thapa family (1806–37) and, even more extensively,
by the Rana family (1846–1951). In these periods, the Shah ruler was relegated to an honorary position without power, while
effective authority was concentrated in the hands of the leading members of the dominant family. Although intrafamilial
arrangements on such questions as the succession and the distribution of responsibilities and spoils were achieved, no effective
national political institutions were created. The excluded noble families had only two alternatives—to accept inferior posts in
the administration and army or to conspire for the overthrow of the dominant family. Until 1950 and to some extent thereafter,
Nepalese politics was basically conspiratorial in character, with familial loyalty taking precedence over loyalty to the crown or
nation.
External relations, 1750–1950
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 18/25
Prithvi Narayan Shah (reigned 1742–75) and his successors established a unified state in the central Himalayas and launched an
ambitious and remarkably vigorous program of expansion, seeking to bring the entire hill area, from Bhutan to Kashmir, under
their authority. They made considerable progress, but successive setbacks in wars with China and Tibet (1788–92), with the
Sikh kingdom in the Punjab (1809), with British India (1814–16), and again with Tibet (1854–56) frustrated Nepal and set the
present boundaries of the kingdom.
The British conquest of India in the 19th century posed a serious threat to Nepal—which expected to be another victim—and
left the country with no real alternative but to seek an accommodation with the British to preserve its independence. This was
accomplished by the Rana family regime after 1860 on terms that were mutually acceptable, if occasionally irritating, to both.
Under this de facto alliance, Kathmandu permitted the recruitment of Nepalese for the highly valued Gurkha units in the British
Indian Army and also accepted British “guidance” on foreign policy; in exchange, the British guaranteed the Rana regime
against both foreign and domestic enemies and allowed it virtual autonomy in domestic affairs. Nepal, however, was also
careful to maintain a friendly relationship with China and Tibet, both for economic reasons and to counterbalance British
predominance in South Asia.
The British withdrawal from India in 1947 deprived the Ranas of a vital external source of support and exposed the regime to
new dangers. Anti-Rana forces, composed mainly of Nepalese residents in India who had served their political apprenticeship in
the Indian nationalist movement, formed an alliance with the Nepalese royal family, led by King Tribhuvan (reigned 1911–55),
and launched a revolution in November 1950. With strong diplomatic support from New Delhi, the rebels accepted a settlement
with the Ranas under which the sovereignty of the crown was restored and the revolutionary forces, led by the Nepali Congress
(NC) party, gained an ascendant position in the administration.
Constitutional monarchy
The introduction of a democratic political system in Nepal, a country accustomed to autocracy and with no deep democratic
tradition or experience, proved a formidable task. A constitution was finally approved in 1959, under which general elections
for a national assembly were held. The NC won an overwhelming victory and was entrusted with the formation of Nepal’s first
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 19/25
popular government. But persistent controversy between the cabinet and King Mahendra (reigned 1955–72) led the king to
dismiss the Nepali Congress government in December 1960 and to imprison most of the party’s leaders. The constitution of
1959 was abolished in 1962, and a new constitution was promulgated that established the crown as the real source of authority.
King Mahendra obtained both Indian and Chinese acceptance of his regime, and the internal opposition was weak, disorganized,
and discouraged. Mahendra died in January 1972 and was succeeded by his son Birendra, who was crowned in 1975.
Throughout the 1970s King Birendra sought to expedite economic development programs while maintaining the “nonparty”
political system established by his father. The results were disappointing on both accounts, and by 1979 a systemic crisis was
evident. To meet the first serious political challenge to the monarchy since 1960, King Birendra announced in May 1979 that a
national referendum would be held to decide between a nonparty and multiparty (by implication, parliamentary) political
system. In the referendum, which was held in May 1980, the political groups supporting the existing nonparty system won by
the relatively small margin of 55 percent, accurately reflecting the sharp differences in the country on basic political issues.
It was in this context that King Birendra decided in 1980 to retain the 1962 constitution but to liberalize the political system by
providing for direct popular election of the National Assembly. The government also permitted the “illegal” political parties,
such as the NC, to function under only minimal constraints. Elections were still formally held on a “partyless” basis, but many
candidates ran informally and openly as members of political parties.
This partial movement toward a democratic parliamentary system satisfied neither the supporters of a multiparty constitutional
monarchy nor several more radical leftist factions, and in February 1990 a coalition of centrist and leftist opposition forces
began a campaign demanding basic political reforms. A series of protests and strikes followed nationwide, and the royal
government’s efforts to suppress the movement with force were ineffectual. In April, as the situation in Kathmandu Valley
worsened, King Birendra lifted the ban on political parties, abrogated the more repressive security ordinances, and on April 16
appointed a coalition interim government headed by the president of the NC, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, but also including the
moderate faction of the communist movement, the United Leftist Front.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 20/25
The policy objectives of the interim government were “to maintain law and order, develop a multiparty system on the basis of
constitutional monarchy, draft a new constitution, and hold general elections” to a parliament. Within a year, all four tasks were
accomplished with remarkable success despite the broad divergence of views among the major political organizations. A draft
of the new constitution, prepared by a broadly representative government commission, was submitted to the palace and the
cabinet on September 10, 1990. In November, following two months of vigorous debate on a number of key issues—including
the role of the king, the development of a secular state, emergency powers, and the status of Nepal’s many languages—an
amended version of the constitution was promulgated by King Birendra that provided for both a constitutional monarchy and a
multiparty parliamentary political system.
General elections held on May 12, 1991, gave the NC a majority in parliament (110 of 205 seats), but the moderate Communist
Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist)—CPN (UML)—with 69 seats, emerged as a strong opposition party. The two
“Pancha” parties usually associated with the old system won only four seats. The elections were thus perceived to constitute a
strong endorsement of the 1990 political changes, and G.P. Koirala, the brother of Nepal’s first elected prime minister (1959–
60), was nominated by the NC and appointed by the king to head the new elected government.
Nepal emerged from this period of rapid political change facing a multitude of economic and social problems; among these
were a stagnant economy and a variety of regional ethnic and religious movements, some of whose basic demands were not
acceptable to the country’s Hindu majority. Although overwhelming support existed for the new democratic constitutional
monarchy system, at both the party and the public level, the democratic movement itself remained badly fractionalized and
antagonistic, making more difficult the new government’s attempt to introduce the kind of hard-hitting economic and social
policies the panchayat governments had carefully avoided in an effort to mollify several small but important interest groups.
Leo E. Rose
Fall of the monarchy
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 21/25
The country’s political life in the 1990s and 2000s was marked by prolonged instability as the monarchy, the NC, and Maoists
jostled for power. Throughout those two decades the government remained largely in the hands of the NC with brief periods of
CPN (UML) control. However, the NC’s leadership squabbled frequently, and the premiership alternated between Bhattarai,
Koirala, and Sher Bahadur Deuba, another prominent member of the NC. Meanwhile, a group of Maoist rebels emerged in the
1990s and rapidly grew in number and strength and established their own breakaway party, the Communist Party of Nepal
(Maoist), or CPN (M). The rebels often used violent tactics to champion the cause of the rural poor and advocated overthrowing
the monarchy. By the early 21st century the Maoists not only posed a serious threat to the government but had virtually
propelled the country into a state of civil war.
The killing in 2001 of the king and most members of the royal family by the crown prince (who also died, from self-inflicted
wounds) further heightened tensions, and, after the massacre, Koirala, who was serving his third term as prime minister, was
forced to resign. Deuba, who replaced Koirala, initially held negotiations with the CPN (M) to end the war, but, after peace talks
broke down months later, he enlisted the help of the United States to suppress the Maoists. The new king, Birendra’s brother
Gyanendra, took an active role in defending the monarchy, meanwhile, including imposing direct rule in 2005. After parliament
was reinstated in April 2006, Koirala became prime minister for the fourth time. Later that year the government of Nepal and
the Maoist insurgency signed a UN-mediated peace accord that provided for temporary representation of the Maoists in the
Council of Ministers, restricted the rebel army to camps, and required both the Maoists and the Nepalese army to lock equal
amounts of their arms in UN-monitored containers.
An interim constitution, which transferred all executive power to the prime minister, was to remain in effect until the weapons
management plan had been completed, elections had been held, and a permanent constitution had been drafted to replace the
1990 document. The extent of the duties of the king as head of state was to be determined by an elected constituent assembly,
which would also draft a new constitution. Elections for the assembly, originally scheduled for June 2007, were postponed
several times, notably after the Maoists pulled out of the government, demanding the immediate dissolution of the monarchy. In
December 2007 it was finally agreed that the monarchy would be abolished, and elections were held in April 2008. The Maoists
—who changed their party name to the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), or UCPN (M), in 2009—won the most
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 22/25
seats, and on May 28, 2008, more than two centuries of royal rule came to an end as the new assembly voted to declare Nepal a
democratic republic.
In July 2008 Ram Baran Yadav of the NC was elected by the assembly as the country’s first president. One month later an
election for prime minister was held in parliament. Maoist leader Pushpa Kamal Dahal, popularly known as Prachanda, won by
a wide margin and formed a coalition government. However, the coalition failed in early May 2009, and Prachanda resigned.
Madhav Kumar Nepal of the CPN (UML) became prime minister later that month at the head of a 22-party coalition. The
change did little to resolve the country’s ongoing political deadlock, particularly the drafting of a new constitution. In June 2010
Prime Minister Nepal resigned under pressure from the UCPN (M), which claimed the right, as the largest political party, to
choose the prime minister.
Parliament, however, could not agree on Nepal’s replacement, and he remained in office until fellow CPN (UML), Jhalanath
Khanal, took over in February 2011. By August, Khanal’s government had collapsed, and the UCPN (M)’s Baburam Bhattarai
had assumed the office. Negotiations in the assembly on a new constitution fared no better under Bhattarai, and in May 2012 the
assembly was dissolved, and members of the government resigned. Bhattarai stayed on as caretaker prime minister until March
2013, when President Yadav appointed Khil Raj Regmi, chief justice of the country’s Supreme Court, as prime minister until
elections could be held.
Parliamentary elections took place in November, with the NC gaining the largest number of seats and the CPN (UML) second.
The two parties discussed forming a coalition government for several months, which finally took office in February 2014.
Sushil Koirala of the NC, a cousin of B.P. and G.P. Koirala, was named prime minister. After only two months in power, the
Koirala administration had to deal with an avalanche on Mount Everest in mid-April that killed 16 sherpas, shut down the
climbing season on the mountain, and sparked widespread protest by the families of those killed, who considered their treatment
by the government inadequate. More disasters followed—a landslide in early August in which 156 people died, floods later that
month that killed 102 more, and a freak snowstorm in the Annapurna region in October that killed several dozen trekkers—and
in each case the government was criticized for its poor response to the crises.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 23/25
2015 Nepal earthquake:
Kathmandu
A rubble-filled street in Kathmandu
shortly after the magnitude-7.8
earthquake that struck Nepal on April
25, 2015.
Those events, however, paled in comparison with the catastrophe that struck Nepal on
April 25, 2015, when the country suffered one of the most-severe earthquakes in its
history. A magnitude-7.8 temblor struck some 50 miles (80 km) northwest of Kathmandu,
causing widespread death and destruction. Initial estimates of hundreds of people killed by
the temblor soon escalated to the thousands—with many thousands more injured—as
debris was cleared in Kathmandu and other cities and rescue workers reached remote
towns and villages. Damage to buildings and infrastructure was widespread, and many of
the country’s historic structures in the Kathmandu Valley that had been included in a
UNESCO World Heritage site (designated 1979) were destroyed or severely damaged. In
addition, the quake triggered avalanches on Mount Everest that descended on hundreds of
people on the mountain for the spring climbing season, killing 19 people—thus surpassing
the death toll from the 2014 avalanche—and injuring dozens more. Numerous aftershocks followed the initial quake, including
a severe magnitude-7.3 temblor on May 12 centred near the Tibet border west of Everest. In all, some 9,000 people were killed
and nearly 16,800 more injured in the two quakes.
Federal republic
The ongoing humanitarian crisis in the country in 2015 helped spur negotiations on the new constitution. In mid-September
parliament finally approved the document, which took effect on September 20 and established Nepal as a secular federal-style
republic. Promulgation of the constitution elicited violent protests by some minority groups, especially Madhesis in the southern
part of the country, whose members claimed that their rights were not being adequately protected. In mid-October parliament
elected Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli as prime minister, succeeding Koirala, and at the end of the month the legislators chose a
woman, Bidhya Devi Bhandari, as the country’s new president. Oli resigned in July 2016, after his government coalition
collapsed and before he was to face a confidence vote. Prachanda replaced him after striking a power-sharing deal with the NC.
In May 2017 Prachanda resigned so that Deuba could take on the premiership until parliamentary elections could be held.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 24/25
The year 2017 was marked by Nepal’s first successful set of elections nationwide in two decades. Elections for more than 750
local councils were held across the nation beginning in May, with a turnout of nearly three-fourths of eligible voters. National
elections were held later in the year, and results showed a resounding victory for a communist coalition backed by both Oli and
Prachanda. After the two former prime ministers reached a power-sharing agreement, their two parties, CPN (UML) and UCPN
(M) respectively, merged into a single party in May 2018: the Nepal Communist Party (NCP).
Under the power-sharing agreement, Oli became prime minister with the expectation that Prachanda would take over the post
halfway through the five-year term. In November 2019 a new agreement, intended to address a dispute over the implementation
of the original agreement, made Prachanda the executive chairman of the NCP and allowed Oli to finish out the full term as
prime minister. Prachanda claimed that this new agreement was also improperly implemented, and he insisted that Oli observe
the original agreement by relinquishing the office of prime minister halfway through his term. Oli refused, and in December
2020 he recommended that the president dissolve parliament and call early elections, a move ruled unconstitutional in February
2021 because no attempt was made to form a new government. Parliament was reinstated in March, and in May Oli lost a vote
of confidence. After weeks of deliberation on the formation of a new government, Oli claimed that a new government could not
be formed, and again he recommended that the president dissolve parliament and call early elections. In July, however, the
dissolution was rejected by the Supreme Court, which ruled that Deuba, then leader of the opposition, should be given the
opportunity to form a government.
The most lively debates in the following year centred on parliament’s ratification of a 2017 compact with the Millennial
Challenge Corporation (MCC), a foreign assistance program established by the United States Congress in 2004. With the
compact due to expire in February 2022 without ratification, parliament was under pressure to approve the agreement despite
significant opposition domestically. After years in the fray between the hegemonic ambitions of India and China, as well as
decades of distrust in the United States in particular, many Nepalis were wary of their government granting contracts for U.S.
investment. The compact was ratified in February 2022 nonetheless. Parliament passed a declaration emphasizing its
interpretation of the agreement as limited by Nepali sovereignty, although that declaration alone could not placate the people’s
concerns.
4/18/24, 10:25 PM Nepal -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
https://www.britannica.com/print/article/409152 25/25
When local elections were held in May 2022, voters registered their distrust in the political establishment. Although the ruling
coalition received the greatest number of electoral victories, the success of independent candidates in major races indicated
frustration with the country’s major political players.
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica
Citation Information
Article Title: Nepal
Website Name: Encyclopaedia Britannica
Publisher: Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc.
Date Published: 12 April 2024
URL: https://www.britannica.comhttps://www.britannica.com/place/Nepal
Access Date: April 18, 2024